Surveying can be determined as a means of making relatively large-scale,
accurate measurements of the Earth’s surfaces. It includes the determination
of the measurement data, the reduction and interpretation of the data to usable
form, and, conversely, the establishment of relative position and size according
to given measurement requirements. Thus, surveying has two similar but
opposite functions: 1) the determination of existing relative horizontal and
vertical position, such as that used for the process of mapping, and 2) the
establishment of marks to control construction or to indicate land boundaries.
Surveying has been an essential element in the development of the human
environment for so many centuries that its importance is often forgotten. It is
an imperative requirement in the planning and execution of nearly every form
of construction. Surveying was essential at the dawn of history, and some of
the most significant scientific discoveries could never have been implemented
were it not for the contribution of surveying. Its principal modern uses are in the
fields of transportation, building, apportionment of land, and communications.
It is quite probable that surveying had its origin in ancient Egypt. The
Great Pyramid of Khufu at Giza was built about 2700 BC, 755 feet (230

metres) long and 481 feet (147 metres) high. Its nearly perfect squareness and
north-south orientation affirm the ancient Egyptians’ command of surveying.
Evidence of some form of boundary surveying as early as 1400 BC has
been found in the fertile valleys and plains of the Tigris, Euphrates, and Nile
rivers. Clay tablets of the Sumerians show records of land measurement and
plans of cities and nearby agricultural areas. Boundary stones marking land plots
have been preserved. There is a representation of land measurement on the wall
of a tomb at Thebes (1400 BC) showing head and rear chainmen measuring a
grainfield with what appears to be a rope with knots or marks at uniform intervals.
There is some evidence that in addition to a marked cord, wooden rods
were used by the Egyptians for distance measurement. There is no record of
any angle-measuring instruments, but there was a level consisting of a vertical
wooden A-frame with a plumb bob supported at the peak of the A so that its
cord hung past an indicator, or index, on the horizontal bar. The index could
be properly placed by standing the device on two supports at approximately
the same elevation, marking the position of the cord, reversing the A, and
making a similar mark. Halfway between the two marks would be the correct
place for the index. Thus, with their simple devices, the ancient Egyptians
were able to measure land areas, replace property corners lost when the Nile
covered the markers with silt during floods, and build the huge pyramids to
exact dimensions.
The Greeks used a form of log line for recording the distances run from
point to point along the coast while making their slow voyages from the Indus
to the Persian Gulf about 325 BC. The magnetic compass was brought to the
West by Arab traders in the 12th century AD. The astrolabe was introduced by
the Greeks in the 2nd century BC. An instrument for measuring the altitudes of
stars, or their angle of elevation above the horizon, took the form of a graduated
arc suspended from a hand-held cord. A pivoted pointer that moved over the
graduations was pointed at the star. The instrument was not used for nautical
surveying for several centuries, remaining a scientific aid only.
The Greeks also possibly originated the use of the groma, a device used
to establish right angles, but Roman surveyors made it a standard tool. It was
made of a horizontal wooden cross pivoted at the middle and supported from
above. From the end of each of the four arms hung a plumb bob. By sighting
along each pair of plumb bob cords in turn, the right angle could be established.
The device could be adjusted to a precise right angle by observing the same
angle after turning the device approximately 90°. By shifting one of the cords
to take up half the error, a perfect angle would result.
About 15 BC the Roman architect and engineer Vitruvius mounted a large
wheel of known circumference in a small frame, in much the same fashion as
the wheel is mounted on a wheelbarrow; when it was pushed along the ground

by hand it automatically dropped a pebble into a container at each revolution;
giving a measure of the distance traveled. It was, in effect, the first odometer.
The water level consisted of either a trough or a tube turned upward at
the ends and filled with water. At each end there was a sight made of crossed
horizontal and vertical slits. When these were lined up just above the water
level, the sights determined a level line accurate enough to establish the grades
of the roman aqueducts. In laying out their great road system, the Romans are
said to have used the plane table. It consists of a drawing board mounted on
a tripod or other stable support and of a straightedge – usually with sights for
accurate aim (the alidade) to the objects to be mapped – along which lines
are drawn. It was the first device capable of recording or establishing angles.
Later adaptations of the plane table had magnetic compasses attached.
Plane tables were in use in Europe in the 16th century, and the principle
of graphic triangulation and intersection was practiced by surveyors. In 1615
Willebrord Snell, a Dutch mathematician, measured an arc of meridian by
instrumental triangulation. In 1620 the English mathematician Edmund Gunter
developed a surveying chain, which was superseded only by the steel tape
beginning in the late 19th century.
The study of astronomy resulted in the development of angle-reading
devices that were based on arcs of large radii, making such instruments too
large for field use. With the publication of logarithmic tables in 1620, portable
angle-measuring instruments came into use. They were called topographic
instruments, or theodolites. They included pivoted arms for sighting and
could be used for measuring both horizontal and vertical angles. Magnetic
compasses may have been included on some.
The vernier, an auxiliary scale permitting more accurate readings (1631),
the micrometer microscope (1638), telescopic sights (1669), and spirit levels
(about 1700) were all incorporated in theodolites by about 1720. Stadia hairs
were first applied by James Watt in 1771. The development of the circledividing engine about 1775, a device for dividing a circle into degrees with
great accuracy, brought one of the greatest advances in surveying methods,
as it enabled angle measurements to be made with portable instruments far
more accurately than had previously been possible.
Modern surveying can be said to have begun by the late 18th century.
One of the most notable early feats of surveyors was the measurement in the
1790s of the meridian from Barcelona, Spain, to Dunkirk, France, by two
French engineers, Jean Delambre and Pierre Méchain, to establish the basic
unit for the metric system of measurement.
Many improvements and refinements have been incorporated in all the
basic surveying instruments. These have resulted in increased accuracy and
speed of operations and opened up possibilities for improved methods in the
field. In addition to modification of existing instruments, two revolutionary
mapping and surveying changes were introduced: photogrammetry, or mapping
from aerial photographs (about 1920), and electronic distance measurement,
including the adoption of the laser for this purpose as well as for alignment
(in the 1960s). Important technological developments starting in the late 20th
century include the use of satellites as reference points for geodetic surveys
and electronic computers to speed the processing and recording of survey data.

The scientific objective of geodesy is to determine the size and shape of
the Earth. The practical role of geodesy is to provide a network of accurately
surveyed points on the Earth’s surface, the vertical elevations and geographic
positions of which are precisely known and, in turn, may be incorporated in
maps. When two geographic coordinates of a control point on the Earth’s
surface, its latitude and longitude, are known as well as its elevation above
sea level, the location of that point is known with accuracy within the limits
of error involved in the surveying processes. In mapping large areas, such as
a whole state or country, the irregularities in the curvature of the Earth must
be considered. A network of precisely surveyed control points provides a
skeleton to which other surveys may be tied to provide progressively finer
networks of more closely space points. The resulting networks of points have
many uses, including anchor points or bench marks for surveys of highways
and other civil features. A major use of control points is to provide reference
points to which the contour lines and other features of topographic maps are
tied. Most topographic maps are made using photogrammetric techniques
and aerial photographs.
The Earth’s figure is that of a surface called the geoid, which over the
Earth is the average sea level at each location; under the continents the geoid
is an imaginary continuation of sea level. The geoid is not a uniform spheroid,
however, because of the existence of irregularities in the attraction of gravity
from place to place on the Earth’s surface. These irregularities of the geoid
would bring about serious errors in the surveyed location of control points
if astronomical methods, which involve use of the local horizon, were used
solely in determining locations. Because of these irregularities, the reference
surface used in geodesy is that of a regular mathematical surface, an ellipsoid
of revolution that fits the geoid as closely as possible. This reference ellipsoid
is below the geoid in some places and above it in the others. Over the oceans,
mean sea level defines the geoid surface, but over the land areas the geoid is
an imaginary sea-level surface.
Today perturbations in the motions of artificial satellites are used to
define the global geoid and gravity pattern with a high degree of accuracy.
Geodetic satellites are positioned at a height of 700-800 kilometers above
the Earth. Simultaneous range observations from several laser stations fix the
position of a satellite, and radar altimeters measure directly its height over
the oceans. Results show that the geoid is irregular; in places its surface is
up to 100 metres higher than the ideal reference ellipsoid and elsewhere it is
as much as 100 metres below it. The most likely explanation for this height
variation is that the gravity (and density) anomalies are related to mantle
convection and temperature differences at depth. An important observation
that confirms this interpretation is that there is a close correlation between the
gravity anomalies and the surface expression of the Earth’s plate boundaries.
This also strengthens the idea that the ultimate driving force of tectonic plate
is a large-scale circulation of the mantle.
A similar satellite ranging technique is also used to determine the drift
rates of continents. Repeated measurements of laser light travel times between
ground stations and satellites permit the relative movement of different control
blocks to be calculated.

A system of triangles usually affords superior horizontal control. All of the
angles and at least one side (the base) of the triangulation system are measured.
Though several arrangements can be used, one of the best is the quadrangle or
a chain of quadrangles. Each quadrangle, with its four sides and two diagonals,
provides eight angles that are measured. To be geometrically consistent, the
angles must satisfy three so-called angle equations and one side equation. That
is to say the three angles of each triangle, which add to 180°, must be of such
sizes that computation through any set of adjacent triangles with the quadrangles
will give the same values for any side. Ideally, the quadrangles should be

parallelograms. If the system is connected with previously determined stations,
the new system must fit the established measurements.
When the survey encompasses an area large enough for the Earth’s
curvature to be a factor, an imaginary mathematical representation of the
Earth must be employed as a reference surface. A level surface at mean sea
level is considered to represent the Earth’s size and shape, and this is called
the geoid. Because of gravity anomalies, the geoid is irregular; however, it is
very nearly the surface generated by an ellipse rotating on its minor axis – i.e.
an ellipsoid slightly flattened at the ends, or oblate. Such a figure is called a
spheroid. Several have been computed by various authorities; the one usually
used as a reference surface by English-speaking nations is (Alexander Ross)
Clarke’s Spheroid of 1866. This oblate spheroid has a polar diameter about
27 miles (43 kilometres) less than its diameter at the Equator.
Because the directions of gravity converge toward the geoid, a length of
the Earth’s surface measured above the geoid must be reduced to its sea-level
equivalent – i.e. to that of the geoid. These lengths are assumed to be the
distances, measured on the spheroid, between the extended lines of gravity
down to the spheroid from the ends of the measured lengths on the actual
surface of the Earth. The positions of the survey stations on the Earth’s surface
are given in spherical coordinates.
Bench marks, or marked points on the Earth’s surface, connected by
precise leveling constitute the vertical controls of surveying. The elevations
of bench marks are given in terms of their heights above a selected level
surface called a datum. In large-level surveys the usual datum is the geoid. The
elevation taken as zero for the reference datum is the height of mean sea level
determined by a series of observations at various points along the seashore
taken continuously for a period of 19 years or more. Because mean sea level
is not quite the same as the geoid, probably because of ocean currents, in
adjusting the level grid for the United States and Canada all heights determined
for mean sea level have been held at zero elevation.
Because the level surfaces, determined by leveling, are distorted slightly in
the area toward the Earth’s poles (because of the reduction in centrifugal force
and the increase in the force of gravity at higher latitudes), the distances between
the surfaces and the geoid do not exactly represent the surface’s heights from
the geoid. To correct these distortions, orthometric corrections must be applied
to long lines of levels at high altitudes that have a north-south trend.
Trigonometric leveling often is necessary where accurate elevations are
not available or when the elevations of inaccessible points must be determined.
From two points of known position and elevation, the horizontal position of
the unknown point is found by triangulation, and the vertical angles from

the known points are measured. The differences in elevation from each of
the known points to the unknown point can be computed trigonometrically.
The National Ocean Service in recent years has hoped to increase the
density of horizontal control to the extent that no location in the United States
will be farther than 50 miles (80 kilometres) from a primary point, and advances
anticipated in analytic phototriangulation suggest that the envisioned density
of control may soon suffice insofar as topographic mapping is concerned.
Existing densities of control in Britain and much of western Europe are already
adequate for mapping and cadastral surveys. 

Most surveying frameworks are erected by measuring the angles and the
lengths of the sides of a chain of triangles connecting the points fixed by global
positioning. The locations of ground features are then determined in relation
to these triangles by less accurate and therefore cheaper methods. Establishing
the framework ensures that detail surveys conducted at different times or by
different surveyors fit together without overlaps or gaps.
For centuries the corners of these triangles have been located on hilltops,
each visible from at least two others, at which the angles between the lines
joining them are measured; this process is called triangulation. The lengths
of one or two of these lines, called bases, are measured with great care; all
the other lengths are derived by trigonometric calculations from them and
the angles. Rapid checks on the accuracy are provided by measuring all three
angles of each triangle, which must add up to 180 degrees.
In small flat areas, working at large scales, it may be easier to measure the
lengths of all the sides, using a tape or a chain, rather than the angles between
them; this procedure, called trilateration, was impractical over large or hilly
areas until the invention of electromagnetic distance measurement (EDM) in
the mid-20th century. This procedure has made it possible to measure distances
as accurately and easily as angles, by electronically timing the passage of
radiation over the distance to be measured; microwaves, which penetrate
atmospheric haze, are used for long distances and light or infrared radiation for
short ones. In the devices used for EDM, the radiation is either light (generated
by a laser or an electric lamp) or an ultrahigh-frequency radio beam. The light
beam requires a clear line of sight; the radio beam can penetrate fog, haze,
heavy rain, dust, sandstorms, and some foliage. Both types have a transmitterreceiver at one survey station. At the remote station the light type contains
a set of corner mirrors; the high-frequency type incorporates a retransmitter
(requiring an operator) identical to the transmitter-receiver at the original
station. A corner mirror has the shape of the inside of a corner of a cube; it
returns light toward the source from whatever angle it is received, within
reasonable limits. A retransmitter must be aimed at the transmitter-receiver.
In both types of instrument, the distance is determined by the length of
time it takes the radio or light beam to travel to the target and back. The elapsed
time is determined by the shift in phase of a modulating signal superimposed
on the carrier beam. Electronic circuitry detects this phase shift and converts
it to units of time; the use of more than one modulating frequency eliminates
ambiguities that could arise if only a single frequency had been employed.
EDM has greatly simplified an alternative technique, called traversing, for
establishing a framework. In traversing, the surveyor measures a succession
of distances and the angles between them, usually along a traveled route or a
stream. Before EDM was available, traversing was used only in flat or forested
areas where triangulation was impossible. Measuring all the distances by tape
or chain was tedious and slow, particularly if great accuracy was required, and
no check was obtainable until the traverse closed, either on itself or between
two points already fixed by triangulation or by astronomical observations.
In both triangulation and traversing, the slope of each measured line must
be allowed for so that the map can be reduced to the horizontal and referred to
sea level. A measuring tape may be stretched along the ground or suspended
between tripods; in precise work corrections must be applied for the sag, for
tension, and for temperature if these differ from the values at which the tape
was standardized. In work of the highest order, known as geodetic, the errors
must be kept to one millimetre in a kilometre, that is, one part in 1,000,000.